Hayles, N. Katharine (1999) "Virtual Bodies and Flickering Signifiers". In *How We Became Post Human - Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature and Informatics*. pp.25-49.

>In a literal sense, technologies of inscription are media when they are perceived as mediating, inserting themselves into the chain of textual production. (Hayles 1999,p.26)

>Kittler identifies the innovative characteristics of the typewriter, originally designed for the blind, not with speed but rather with "spatially designated and discrete signs," along with a corresponding shift from the word as flowing image to the word "as a geometrical figure created by the spatial arrangements of the letter keys" (here Kittler quotes Richard Herbertz).(Hayles 1999,p.26)

>Typewriter keys are directly proportionate to the script they produce. One keystroke yields one letter, and striking the key harder produces a darker letter. The system lends itself to a signification model that links signifier to signified in direct correspondence, for there is a one-to-one relation between the key and the letter it produces. Moreover, the Signifier itself is spatially discrete, durably inscribed, and flat. (Hayles 1999,p.26)

>How does this experience change with electronic media? The relation between striking a key and producing text with a computer is very different from the relation achieved with a typewriter. Display brightness is unrelated to keystroke pressure, and striking a single key can effect massive changes in the entire text. The computer restores and heightens the sense of word as image-an image drawn in a medium as fluid and changeable as water.(Hayles 1999,p.26)

>Interacting wih electronic images rather than with a materially resistant text, I absorb through my fingers as well as my mind a model of signification in which no simple one-to-one correspondence exists between signifier and signified. (Hayles 1999,p.26)
 
>The technologies of virtual reality, with their potential for full-body mediation, further illustrate the kind of phenomena that foreground pattern and randomness and make presence and absence seem irrelevant. Already an industry worth hundreds of millions of dollars, virtual reality puts the user's sensory system into a direct feedback loop with a computer. (Hayles 1999,p.26)

Why does she describe VR technologies in the plural? It's not only that there is more than one platform... (And in 1999 there were few if any commercial VR platforms anyway!)

>[Users of VR experience a] disorienting, exhilarating effect of the feeling that subjectivity is dispersed throughout the cybernetic circuit. In these systems, the user learns, kinesthetically and proprioceptively, that the relevant boundaries for interaction are defined less by the skin than by the feedback loops connecting body and simulation in a technobio-integrated circuit. (Hayles 1999,p.27)

Why does Hayles contrast absence/presence with pattern and randomness? What's the significance of this?

>Questions about presence and absence do not yield much leverage in this situation, for the avatar both is and is not present, just as the user both is and is not inside the screen. Instead, the focus shifts to questions about pattern and randomness. What transformations govern the connections between user and avatar? What parameters control the construction of the screen world? What patterns can the user discover through interaction with the system? Where do these patterns fade into randomness? What stimuli cannot be encoded within the system and therefore exist only as extraneous noise? When and how does this noise coalesce into pattern? (Hayles 1999,p.27)

>Sherry Turkle, in her fascinating work on people who spend serious time in MUDs, convincingly shows that virtual technologies, in a riptide of reverse influence, affect how real life is seen. "Reality is not my best window," one of her respondents remarks.(Hayles 1999,p.27)

I love this phrase 'a riptide of reverse influence'... really reminds me of Hito Steyerl's *Too Much World*. 

>If the effects that the shift toward pattern/randomness has on literature are not widely recognized, perhaps it is because they are at once pervasive and elusive.(Hayles 1999,p.28)

This closely relates to Snelting's notion that 'the fish can't judge the water'.

>A book produced by typesetting may look very similar to one generated by a computerized program, but the technological processes involved in this transformation are not neutral. (Hayles 1999,p.28)

>Different technologies of text production suggest different models of signification; changes in signification are linked with shifts in consumption; shifting patterns of consumption initiate new experiences of embodiment; and embodied experience interacts with codes of representation to generate new kinds of textual worlds. (Hayles 1999,p.28)

>In fact, each category--production, signification, consumption, bodily experience, and representation--is in constant feedback and feedforward loops with the others. (Hayles 1999,p.28)

>As the emphasis shifts to pattern and randomness, characteristics of print texts that used to be transparent (because they were so pervasive) are becoming visible again through their differences from digital textuality. We lose the opportunity to understand the implications of these shifts if we mistake the dominance of pattern/randomness for the disappearance of the material world. In fact, it is precisely because material interfaces have changed that pattern and randomness can be perceived as dominant over presence and absence.(Hayles 1999,p.28)

>The pattern/randomness dialectic does not erase the material world; information in fact derives its efficacy from the material infrastructures it appears to obscure. This illusion of erasure should be the subject of inquiry, not a presupposition that inquiry takes for granted.(Hayles 1999,p.28) 

I seem to be quoting almost the whole of this chapter (so far) verbatim, because there's so much good stuff here. I particularly liked the idea that the informational logics of randomness and pattern don't get rid of materiality, but--even as they ascend in importance--help us understand the structures of materiality... And as the above emphasise, even information has a material aspect to it.

On p.29 Hayles discusses 'a parallel doubleness' of materiality between books and bodies. Why does she choose to compare these? Is it because she's trying to make the point that informational paradigm can be applied to genetics and literature? Or, like Bill Nichol's *The Work of Culture in the Age of Cybernetic Systems* that such paradigms end up determining the way we think about things. Maybe it's both: they are similar, and can be thought of in parallel; but both technologies, and the very thinking of them together, also tend to result in 'feedback and feedforward loops' i.e. a 'riptide of reverse influence'.  

>As we have seen, the human body is understood in molecular biology simultaneously as an expression of genetic information and as a physical structure. Similarly, the literary corpus is at once a physical object and a space of representation, a body and a message. Because they have bodies, books and humans have something to lose if they are regarded solely as informational patterns, namely the resistant materiality that has traditionally marked the durable inscription of books no less than it has marked our experiences ofliving as embodied creatures.(Hayles 1999,p.29)

Not sure on the exact framing of informatics here. Hayles says that informatics denote a network of relations. From Haraway, she suggests it includes: 'the technologies of information as well as the biological, social, linguistic, and cultural changes that initiate, accompany, and complicate their development'. (Hayles 1999,p.29) In sum then, it seems she understands informatics as the study of technologies networked relations with biological, social, cultural and other spheres. University of Edinburgh describes informatics as 'the study of the structure, behaviour, and interactions of natural [systems] and engineered computational systems.' (Hayles 1999,p.29) https://www.ed.ac.uk/files/atoms/files/what20is20informatics.pdf also see https://www.designinformatics.org/

The main argument of this chapter is:

>The contemporary pressure toward dematerialization, understood as an epistemic shift toward pattern/randomness and away from presence/absence, affects human and textual bodies on two levels at once, as a change in the body (the material substrate) and as a change in the message (the codes of representation). (Hayles 1999,p.29)

Quite a few artists, designers and theorists at the time understood digital tehnology as 'immaterial' or 'virtual'. This idea is still there in the name Virtual Reality, and implied in terms like 'cyberspace'.  

>The connectivity between these changes is, as they say in the computer industry, maSSively parallel and highly interdigitated. (Hayles 1999,p.29)

...that is, she's arguing that the material and informatic are closely entwined and interrelated, affecting one another in complex ways. Interdigitated means interlocking like fingers of clasped hands. Massively parallel 'is the term for using a large number of computer processors (or separate computers) to simultaneously perform a set of coordinated computations in parallel. The term first coined with the introduction of GPGPU \[General Purpose GPU\] by NVIDIA. GPUs are massively parallel architecture with tens of thosands of threads.

See also https://www.omnisci.com/technical-glossary/gpgpu and https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massively_parallel

>My narrative will therefore weave back and forth between the represented worlds of contemporary fictions, models of signification implicit in word processing, embodied experience as it is constructed by interactions with information technologies, and the technologies themselves. (Hayles 1999,p.29)

i.e. between literature, semiotics, the embodied experience of such content as it's constructed by technology and the technology itself. Hayles is attacking 'massively parallel' topics, in order to trace the various feedback/forward loops between culture, society and computing. Reminds me somewhat of Manovich's concept -- in The Language of New Media (published a couple of years later in 2001) -- of cultural transcoding. For Manovich, transcoding is central to what computers do... taking a human layer and making it machine readable or vice versa, making computing layer readable by humans. In cultural transcoding, these two separate layers, the cultural and the computational are compounded together.

Information technologies do more than change modes of text production, storage, and dissemination. They fundamentally alter the relation of Signified to Signifier. (Hayles 1999, pp.29-30)

Carrying the instabilities implicit in Lacanian floating signifiers one step further, information technologies create what I will calljlickering signifiers, characterized by their tendency toward unexpected metamorphoses, attenuations, and dispersions.(Hayles 1999, p.30)

# Discussion of terms
Heterogeneous, fissured, discursive, 
